satya se muhn na mod prani

believe me main jhoot bol raha tha

Appne bahut hi badhai time waste kiya mera

dhyan se dekho is insan ko....

Listen to your elders, not because they arev always correct.
But baceause they have more experience of being wrong.

Everybody is genius, but if you judge a fish by it's ability to climb a tree, 
it will live it's whole life believing that it's a stupid

A smooth sea never made a skillful sailor.

the alphabets in teaching and cheating are same. The one who cheats us teaches us something in life.

The reason we struggle with insecurity is we compare our behind-the-scenes with the highlighted reels of other's.

people will treat you only in one way, it's the way you allow them.

When mind is weak situation is a problem,
When mind is balanced situation is a challange,
when MInd is strong situation becomes opportunity.


work hard in silence and let success make the noise.

I have my problems in life but my lips does not know about that. They always smile.
Facts of life,

When your time is good your mistakes are taken as joke, when your time is bad your jokes are taken as mistake.

Don't follow the crowd, let the crowd follow you. 

Don't feel bad if people rejects you, people usually rejectes expensive things, which they can't afford. 

Life is unpredictable, You never know what's coming next. Don't ever get too comfortable, always be ready for change.



Tricks to become a loving, positive person

Have the desire: First thing first, to become a positive person one must have a strong desire to be positive. And the desire will come only if you are convinced that becoming a positive person will enhance the quality of life.
 
Be realistic: Do not try to become a saint. Becoming a positive person does not mean you can never have any negative emotion or encounter any negative situation. It is the overall attitude that matters. Don't get bogged down by failure, and disappointed when your expectations are not met. Mentally, you should always be calculating a way out of difficult situations come what may.

Experiment: Be a keen observer. Use everyday life incidents to see how you can manage them in a more positive manner. These will serve as perfect instances to turn your outlook more positive. For starters, contemplate how you could have better handled a situation by being less hostile and more indulgent. Come up with five ways that could have saved the day, and learn to take things at face value sometimes. Remember, your ability to trust the other person also reflects your genuineness.

Speech and body language: Try and make positive words a part of your daily lingo, and work on your body language in way that you come across as friendly and approachable. Look amused when something is amusing, laugh when something is funny, congratulate when someone's bought something new, and give others a chance to narrate their side of the story. Never think you are the only interesting, knowing one around.

Company: One way to becoming positive is to seek positive company as both positivity and negativity are infectious. If the people you spend most of your time with are grumpy or have a pessimistic standpoint, you'll find yourself mirroring the same emotions before a different set of people inadvertently. In order to inculcate positivity it is imperative that your friend circle is a positive, energetic, and a happy bunch. You'll find yourself carrying the same positivity everywhere you go.

Activities: Do not remain idle and brood. Take up positive activities with others or in isolation. Share a joke, narrate a pleasant incident, take part in sporting activities, go for a run in the evening after work, have healthy sex, and you'll find yourself bubbling with positive energy.

Take it easy: Everyday life is bound to give you shocks. Be prepared to minimise impact and shrug it off. For instance, you may get too hassled everyday while driving to work or trying to park your car. When you accept the fact that certain things cannot be changed, you'll be more at ease with yourself and those around too.

Learn yoga: Says yoga teacher and nutritionist, Abhilasha Kale, "Do pranayam everyday as it lets you focus and meditate. Not only does it secrete happy hormones but also creates a sense of awareness within you." With the help of yogic asanas you control your breathing, and by way of it, control your mind from wandering. Every time you do yoga, you feel a surge of positive energy through your body that calms your nerves, soothes your mind, elevates your mood, and not to mention enhances your level of tolerance.

Say 'thank you': Thank god, thank your parents, friends, and thank yourself for all the hard work you did, for everything you achieved. Says Abhilasha, "Saying thank you frequently makes you humble, and a humble person is seldom cynical."





1. To decide not to decide is a decision. To fail to decide is a failure.
2. The simplest subjects are the ones you do not know anything about.
3. If you can distinguish between good advice and bad advice, then you do not need them.
4. An important reason for an executive's existence is to make sensible exceptions to policy


Keep your face to the sunshine and you will not see the shadow.

I dont' want to sit around and hope good things will happen. I want to make them happen and I want to control my own destiny.
Sometimes it's hard to move on, but once you move on, you will reliaze that it was the best decision.





1. Regular naps prevent old age, especially if you take them while driving.

2. Having one child makes you a parent; having two you are a referee.

3. Marriage is a relationship in which one person is always right and the other is the husband!

4. I believe we should all pay our tax with a smile. I tried - but they wanted cash.

5. Don't feel bad. A lot of people have no talent.

6. Don't marry the person you want to live with, marry the one you cannot live without, but whatever you do, you'll regret it later.

7. You can't buy love, but you pay heavily for it.

8. Bad officials are elected by good citizens who do not vote.

9. Laziness is nothing more than the habit of resting before you get tired.

10. Marriage is give and take. You'd better give it to her or she will take it anyway.

11. My wife and I always compromise. I admit I'm wrong and she agrees with me.

12. Those who can't laugh at themselves leave the job to others.

13. Ladies first. Pretty ladies sooner.

14. A successful marriage requires falling in love many times, always with the same person.

15. You are getting old when you enjoy remembering things more than doing them.

16. It doesn't matter how often a married man changes his job, he still ends up with the same boss.

17. Saving is the best thing. Especially when your parents have done it for you.

18. It's funny when people discuss Love Marriage vs Arranged. It's like asking someone, if suicide is better or being murdered.

19. There is only one perfect child in the world and every mother has it.

20. It is no exaggeration to say that the undecided could go one way or another.




 